[DOC] 3.1.0 release (#3704)
percona/pmm: documentation/docs/release-notes/3.1.0.md

## Release highlights

### Enhanced MongoDB monitoring
We've improved MongoDB monitoring with detailed query metrics, better dashboard visualization, and new capabilities to quickly identify performance bottlenecks.

#### Extended metrics and labels for MongoDB Query Analytics (QAN)

The [QAN dashboard](../use/qan/index.md) includes new metrics and filters that highlight inefficient execution paths and offer detailed lock and storage metrics. With the improved filters, you can quickly pinpoint problematic queries based on application, client, user, or plan summary:

##### New metrics
In the **Query Details** section of the QAN dashboard you'll now find these additional metrics:

=== "Query execution metrics"
    New metrics for identifying inefficient query patterns:

    - **Docs Examined**: the number of documents scanned. High values may indicate missing or inefficient indexes.
    - **Keys Examined**: the number of index keys scanned. Compare this with **Docs Examined** to assess index efficiency.
    - **Docs Returned**: the number of documents returned to the PMM Client. A high **Docs Examined** to **Docs Returned** ratio may indicate inefficiencies that need optimization. 

> 

Reviewer: let's add collscan/fullscan here

Reviewer: it's available under Full Scan column

    - **Locks Database Time Acquiring Micros Read Shared**: captures the time spent waiting for database read locks, critical for performance analysis.
    - **Locks Collection Acquire Count Read Shared**: tracks how often read locks are used at the collection level.

=== "Storage metrics"
    New metrics for analyzing I/O performance:

    - **Storage Bytes Read**: measures the volume of data read from storage during operations, helping identify I/O-intensive queries.
    - **Storage Time Reading Micros**: tracks the time spent on storage read operations, which is useful for detecting potential storage bottlenecks.

##### New filters

The QAN dashboard now includes several additional MongoDB-specific filter options:

- **Plan Summary**: filters queries by execution plan type (COLLSCAN, IXSCAN, etc.) to easily identify inefficient full collection scans. 
- **Application Name**: filters queries by the application that executed them. 
- **User**: isolates queries by specific database users. 
- **Database**: focuses on particular database instances. 

    ![New Mongo filters](../images/MongoFiltersQAN.png) 

#### Improved query fingerprint visualization

> MongoDB query fingerprints in QAN now display the actual query structure, including operators and field names, similar to the format used in MongoDB OpsManager. 

Reviewer: let's say in MongoDB Shell

Reviewer: I believe it's better to not mention our competitors.

- [PMM-13575](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PMM-13575) - The `mongodb_pbm_agent_status` metric in MongoDB exporter now includes a `self` label to differentiate between a PMM Client reporting its own status versus reporting status of other Clients in the cluster. 

    The `self` label is set to `1` when the agent is reporting about itself, and to `0` when reporting about other Clients. This helps identify more precisely which specific Client is experiencing problems without false positives on functioning nodes. 

- [PMM-13718](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PMM-13718) - Improved user access control to PMM logs. The PMM logs link in the Help menu is now hidden for users without administrative privileges instead of displaying an _Access denied_ error when accessed.

- [PMM-13676](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PMM-13676) - Redesigned all PMM email templates with PMM branding, replacing Grafana logos and styling. Alert emails now also include options for professional support services when needed.

> - [PMM-13374](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PMM-13374) - Improved MongoDB query fingerprint presentation in QAN to display a more detailed query structure, similar to OpsManager format. This makes query patterns easier to recognizable and improves troubleshooting for users migrating from other MongoDB monitoring tools.

Reviewer: let's use MongoDB Shell here too

## Release highlights

### Enhanced MongoDB monitoring
We've improved MongoDB monitoring with detailed query metrics, better dashboard visualization, and new capabilities to quickly identify performance bottlenecks.

#### Extended metrics and labels for MongoDB Query Analytics (QAN)

The [QAN dashboard](../use/qan/index.md) includes new metrics and filters that highlight inefficient execution paths and offer detailed lock and storage metrics. With the improved filters, you can quickly pinpoint problematic queries based on application, client, user, or plan summary:

##### New metrics
In the **Query Details** section of the QAN dashboard you'll now find these additional metrics:

=== "Query execution metrics"
    New metrics for identifying inefficient query patterns:

    - **Docs Examined**: the number of documents scanned. High values may indicate missing or inefficient indexes.
    - **Keys Examined**: the number of index keys scanned. Compare this with **Docs Examined** to assess index efficiency.

>     - **Docs Returned**: the number of documents returned to the PMM Client. A high **Docs Examined** to **Docs Returned** ratio may indicate inefficiencies that need optimization. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Docs Returned**: the number of documents returned. A high **Docs Examined** to **Docs Returned** ratio may indicate inefficiencies that need optimization. 
```
I don't believe this has anything to do with being returned to the PMM Client... but feel free to ignore if it does and I just don't understand.

Reviewer: Yeah, you are right, it's a number of documents returned to the client queried them.

=== "Response metric"
    New metric for evaluating query response efficiency:

    **Response Length**: measures the size of the response payload in bytes, helping identify large result sets that may impact performance.

=== "Lock statistics metrics"
    New metrics for detecting lock contention issues:

    - **Locks Global Acquire Count Read/Write Shared**: tracks how often global locks are used, helping to spot delays caused by multiple processes accessing the same data.
    - **Locks Database Acquire Count Read Shared**: tracks how often read locks are used in the database.
    - **Locks Database Acquire Wait Count Read Shared**: counts the times a database read lock request had to wait. High values may signal delays due to contention.
    - **Locks Database Time Acquiring Micros Read Shared**: captures the time spent waiting for database read locks, critical for performance analysis.
    - **Locks Collection Acquire Count Read Shared**: tracks how often read locks are used at the collection level.

>     - **Full Scan (COLLSCAN)**: tracks instances where the entire dataset is scanned, meaning every document in the collection is read. This results in high I/O operations, long execution times, and scalability challenges. High  COLLSCAN should be addressed to enhance performance.

Reviewer: I don't think that it should be under Lock statistics, better to move it to "Query execution metrics"

=== "Storage metrics"
    New metrics for analyzing I/O performance:

    - **Storage Bytes Read**: measures the volume of data read from storage during operations, helping identify I/O-intensive queries.

>     - **Storage Time Reading Micros**: tracks the time spent on storage read operations, which is useful for detecting potential storage bottlenecks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Storage Time Reading in Microseconds (µs)**: tracks the time spent on storage read operations, which is useful for detecting potential storage bottlenecks.
```

The QAN dashboard now includes several additional MongoDB-specific filter options:

- **Plan Summary**: filters queries by execution plan type (COLLSCAN, IXSCAN, etc.) to easily identify inefficient full collection scans. 
- **Application Name**: filters queries by the application that executed them. 
- **User**: isolates queries by specific database users. 
- **Database**: focuses on particular database instances. 

    ![New Mongo filters](../images/MongoFiltersQAN.png) 

#### Improved query fingerprint visualization
MongoDB query fingerprints in QAN now display the actual query structure, including operators and field names, similar to the format used in a MongoDB shell. 

The previous display only showed operation type and collection name, which provided limited context for troubleshooting. 

The new fingerprint format makes query patterns immediately recognizable while still anonymizing sensitive data. 

![New Mongo query fingerprint](../images/Mongo_fingerprint.png)

#### Enhanced query examples visualization
We've refined the query examples interface in Mongo QAN by removing unnecessary enumeration labels ("1 item", "2 item", etc.) and upgrading the JSON viewer component. 

> This creates a cleaner display that emphasizes the actual query content rather than distracting metadata.

Reviewer 2: for users that actually wanted that metadata (assuming there are any) can they still find that info elsewhere? if yes, might be worth explaining where it is, if no...ok to remain silent on it since we say "it's removed".

Reviewer: No, there are no option to get them.

- resolved visualization issues in **Disk I/O** and **Network traffic** panels for more reliable performance monitoring

#### Enhanced filtering capabilities 
We've improved the filtering experience on the [MongoDB Instances Compare](../reference/dashboards/dashboard-mongodb-instances-compare.md) dashboard with four new selection boxes in addition to the existing **Service Name** filter. These filters allow you to narrow down instances by:

- **Replication Set**
- **Environment**
- **Cluster**
- **Node** 

![MongoDB Instances Compare](../images/New_Filters.png)

These additional filters make it easier to navigate and compare MongoDB instances in larger environments, enabling you to quickly narrow down the specific instances you want to monitor.

### Enhanced role-based access control

We've refined role-based access for Advisors and Alerts, making it easier for teams to collaborate while maintaining security boundaries:

#### Advisors access for Editors

Users with the Editor role can now access Advisors insights without requiring Admin privileges. This is especially beneficial in managed service environments where Admin access is typically restricted to database administrators.

> While Editors can view Advisors insights, only Admins can run, disable, or edit Advisors and execute checks.

Reviewer 2: What is the difference between run and execute checks?

Reviewer: No difference. let's remove "run"

For more details, see [PMM roles and permissions](../admin/roles/index.md).

### PMM Demo update

We have upgraded the [PMM demo environment](https://pmmdemo.percona.com/) from PMM2 to PMM3. The demo provides a fully functional PMM3 interface with pre-configured database monitoring, real-world query examples, and all the latest features. Try it out to test PMM3 without setup!

> 

Reviewer: let's not add it to release notes as it's not related to 3.1.0 release
